# Read Alignment and Gene Expression Quantification

## Description
Single cell RNA-Seq reads derived from differentiating B6xCast mouse ESC hybrids (day 0-5) were generated by the Fluidigm C1-HT protocol. It employs a dual barcoding strategy, where read R1 contains a custom barcode (position 1-6, cell barcode) and a unique molecular identifier (position 7-11), read R2 maps to the cDNA sequence and read R3 contains a Nextera (row) barcode. After demultiplexing using the Nextera barcode, read R2 was aligned with STAR (v.2.5.2b) to the mouse genome genome (mm10) and all 96 ERCC spike-in sequences, allowing for unique alignments with a maximum of two mismatches. SNPsplit (v.0.3.2) was used to N-mask the genome using high confidence SNPs. The Drop-seq pipeline (v.1.12) was used to extract both cell barcode and UMI from read R1 and to quantify gene expression. In detail, reads were demultiplexed using the cell barcode, and molecules per gene were counted as the number of unique exon-overlapping UMI barcodes using the mm10 Ensembl gene annotation.  For RNA velocity analyses unique UMI barcodes aligning only to exonic regions (spliced) or overlapping with intronic regions (unspliced) were used. For allele-specific (AS) quantification each read overlapping a SNP position was assigned to its parental genome using SNPsplit (v.0.3.2) and the number of unique UMI barcodes assigned to either parental genome were counted for each gene.

## Software dependencies and operating systems
This folder stores all the BASH and R scripts used for single-cell read alignment and gene expression quantification. 

In order to perform these analyses, the following have to be installed and stored in the "alignment/scripts/" directory:
- Drop-seq (v.1.12) JAVA script from "https://github.com/broadinstitute/Drop-seq/"
- SNPsplit (v.0.3.2) PERL script from "https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/SNPsplit/"
- STAR (v.2.5.2b) aligner from "https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR"
- R (v.3.6.1) software from "https://cran.r-project.org/"

R scripts can be run using R (v.3.6.1) software (available at "https://cran.r-project.org/"). The following R libraries are required:
- data.table (v.1.12.8)
- doParallel (v.1.0.15)
- foreach (v.1.5.0)
- edgeR (v.3.26.8)
- plyr (v.1.8.6)
- Rsubread (v.1.34.7)
- R.utils (v.2.10.1)

## Reproduce analysis
The alignemnt and gene counting analyses can be reproduced following the instruction described by the Sweave R scripts, stored in the "alignment/launch/" directory:
- (i)   "1_MaskMouseGenome.Rnw": generation of the B6/Cast N-masked FASTA files and GTF annotations
- (ii)  "2_HighOutput_AlignCount.Rnw": alignment of the FASTQ files (time points: d0-d4) generated in High Output mode, and single-cell gene expression quantification 
- (iii) "3_RapidRun_AlignCount.Rnw": alignment of the FASTQ files (time points: d1) generated in Rapid Run mode, and single-cell gene expression quantification 
- (iv)  "4_CountMatrices.Rnw": combination of single cell count matrices (generated by (ii) and (iii)) for all cells and time points
- (v) "5_BulkRNASeq.Rnw": alignment of the bulk RNA-Seq FASTQ files (TXdXic and TX1072 cell lines) and gene expression quantification

In the first section of (i)-(v), the user has to define the "path" variable as the directory where the "Pacini_paper/alignment/" folder has been stored.

The above Sweave R scripts launch the BASH and R scripts stored in the "alignment/scripts/" folder, and store the resulting allele specific (AS) and not-AS count matrices (exon-overlapping, spliced and unspliced) in the "alignment/Count_Matrices/" output directory. The "alignment/mm10/" folder includes some files necessary to run (i), and the GTF files for the intronic ("intron.gtf.gz") and exonic&intronic ("wholegene.gtf.gz") mm10 gene annotations.

## Computational time
The computational time required to run the scripts generating the GTF files in (i) and the ones stored in the "scripts/alignment/" and "scripts/counting/" directories can be drastically reduced through parallel computing. If the above scripts are parallelized over 30 nodes using 10 cores each, the computational time required to reproduce the single cell alignment and gene expression quantification described in (i)-(iii) is about 2 hours. The (iv) R script can be run locally on a quad-core CPU in about 20 minutes. The (v) R script can be run locally on a quad-core CPU in about 30 minutes.
